# Proposal Abstract Draft

Authority control is one of the foundational components of good library database management. Catalogers need to understand basic tenets for the creation and maintenance of a library catalog outlined by Cutter (1876) and in the Paris Principles, which are part of this foundation. Writings by Schmierer (1980), Runkle (1980), and Malinconoco (1979) build on this foundation and are considered essential reading on the place of authority in information science and information management.

Libraries are in the business of acquiring, storing, maintaining, preserving, and providing access to items and collections of items (i.e. information objects). Catalogers describe these items and collections to provide intellectual, physical, and digital access to items and collections. Metadata is the description catalogers create to describe and inventory these items and collections. Well recorded metadata enables access to information objects in time of need. Cataloging includes a range of activities and processes for creating metadata to describe information resources. These activities include description, subject analysis, classification, and authority control. Authority control is the process of establishing, through verification and validation, controlled forms of entities (i.e. people, places, corporate bodies, families, subjects, and genres) that are used to describe information resources. This paper will explain authority records in relation to authority control, cataloging, and catalog records.

Authority control establishes a database of consistent, unique headings that includes variant terms, related terms, and other associated information to help disambiguate entities, and notes about the authority including sources of information. The authorized terms in this database act as a controlled vocabulary that supports users’ information retrieval needs by bringing precision to searches and collocating related materials in results lists. Individual libraries create and maintain this authority database in connection with their integrated library system.

On a larger scale, national and cooperative programs establish a collective authority database that libraries can pull from as well as contribute to (i.e. PCC, NACO, SACO, etc.). Libraries use a variety of means to maintain their authority database (i.e. authority file) including via batch loading, partnering with library vendors, participating in cooperative cataloging programs, and manually editing records one by one. Libraries also often need to consider how archival authority structures complement bibliographic authority records and how these can work together in a discovery system.

Authority control establishes consistent, reliable, and unique headings to help library patrons and staff to find specific items and show what information resources the library has in its holdings by author, title, subject, or other attributes. Examples of how authority control benefits patrons and staff will be shown in the paper.

Current practices and technologies in authority control will be discussed including computer and networking technologies. The move towards the semantic web and linked data technologies continues to shape the practices of authority control in libraries. Encoding formats and the motivation to connect authorities to other real world entities on resources like VIAF, Wikipedia, and ISNI will be discussed. While the practices and technologies used to implement authority control continue to evolve, the underlying foundational principles and purposes remain the same.
